Describe rate limiting in Whisper (#60)
status-im/specs: status-whisper-usage-spec.md

* proof-of-work requirement not larger than `0.002`
* time-to-live not lower than `10` (in seconds)

## Rate limiting

> In order to provide a very basic Denial-of-Service attack protection, there SHOULD be a rate limiting applied to leaf Whisper nodes, i.e. nodes not being controler within a cluster.

Reviewer: what's the 'leaf Whisper node' distinction about? strikes me as odd, a protocol shouldn't take something like "a cluster" as for granted IMO

controller/controlled typo

Reviewer 2: I guess leaf node is the wrong wording here? 
Are there actual leaf nodes right now? Doesn't each node currently have multiple peers (although perhaps always other cluster nodes?).

So it is rather "whitelisted cluster nodes" versus "the rest". I don't think I like that distinction.

Reviewer 2: I guess leaf node is the wrong wording here?
Are there actual leaf nodes right now? Doesn't each node currently have multiple peers (although perhaps always other cluster nodes?).

So it is rather "whitelisted cluster nodes" versus "the rest". I don't think I like that distinction.

Author: Yeah, the current Status client nodes are are leaf nodes but this term is not used anywhere. The other is light nodes so the nodes which do not broadcast messages.

> So it is rather "whitelisted cluster nodes" versus "the rest". I don't think I like that distinction.

This is the most accurate. Not sure we can do it other way around. This is the reality where we have nodes which produce messages (and we want to rate limit them) and nodes which pass them along and we don't want limit these.

Reviewer 3: I agree that this should be a generic setting on the node, which is tweaked based on the context.

> In order to provide a very basic Denial-of-Service attack protection, there SHOULD be a rate limiting applied to leaf Whisper nodes, i.e. nodes not being controler within a cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In order to provide a very basic Denial-of-Service attack protection, rate limiting SHOULD be applied to leaf Whisper nodes, i.e. nodes not being controller within a cluster.
```

> Currently, the rate limiting is applied on peer IDs and IPs from which the packets come from. It is still in progress to decide on specific numbers. The Whisper nodes within a cluster SHOULD be whitelisted to avoid dropping connection when broadcasting messages between each other. When a limit is hit, the packet or the connection MUST be dropped (TBD).

Reviewer: Not sure about the use of "Currently" "in the future/TBD" - for temporal WIP stuff lets put in comment and only describe _what is_ in the spec

Author: That's why it is a draft PR. I haven't finalized the numbers. When I do, we can be more specific. However, I don't even know whether we should put any specific numbers... It depends on a situation.

> The rate limiting SHOULD be also applied on a topic level in order to prevent a peer to spam a particular channel. The specific limit per peer per topic is to be decided.

Reviewer: "to be decided" isn't spec language

Reviewer 3: Do we have any information on the percentage of redundant envelops received from peers?

> The rate limiting SHOULD be also applied on a topic level in order to prevent a peer to spam a particular channel. The specific limit per peer per topic is to be decided.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The rate limiting SHOULD also be applied on the topic level in order to prevent a peer from spamming a particular channel. The specific limit per peer per topic is to be decided.
```

* proof-of-work requirement not larger than `0.002`
* time-to-live not lower than `10` (in seconds)

## Rate limiting

In order to provide an optional very basic Denial-of-Service attack protection, each node SHOULD define its own rate limits. The rate limits SHOULD be applied on IPs, peer IDs, and envelope topics.

Each node MAY decide to whitelist, i.e. do not rate limit, selected IPs or peer IDs.

If a peer exceeds node's rate limits, the connection between them MAY be dropped.

> Each node SHOULD broadcast its rate limits to its peers using rate limits packet code (`0x14`). The rate limits is RLP-encoded information:

Reviewer: Why 0x14?

Author: We can either start from some further number to allow more message related packet codes to be in front or just continue from the last used.

```
[ IP limits, PeerID limits, Topic limits ]
```

`IP limits`: 4-byte wide unsigned integer
`PeerID limits`: 4-byte wide unsigned integer
`Topic limits`: 4-byte wide unsigned integer

> The rate limits MAY also be sent as an optional parameter in the handshake.

Reviewer: This needs more detail, how exactly will the handshake be added optionally? See comment below

> Each node SHOULD record rate limits advertised by its peers and adjust the number of sent packets in order not to exceed peer's rate limits. If the limit gets exceeded, the connection MAY be dropped.

Reviewer 4: I'm not 100% sure what this means

Author: Assume Node A having Peer1, Peer2 and Pee3. Node A advertised rate limits of 5 messages per second per peer. Peer1 should throttle broadcasting messages to Node A and respect the limit of 5 messages per second. This brings a dangerous problem of skipping some messages.

Reviewer 4: Can this be better formulated in the spec, not sure how yet.

Reviewer: since whisper is queue based, maybe talking in those terms would be useful

Author: > Each node SHOULD respect rate limits advertised by its peers. The number of packets SHOULD be throttled in order not to exceed peer's rate limits. If the limit gets exceeded, the connection MAY be dropped by the peer.

Better?

* proof-of-work requirement not larger than `0.002`
* time-to-live not lower than `10` (in seconds)

## Handshake

Handshake is a RLP-encoded packet sent to a newly connected peer. It MUST start with a Status Code (`0x00`) and follow up with items:
```
[ protocolVersion, PoW, bloom, isLightNode, confirmationsEnabled, rateLimits ]
```

`protocolVersion`: version of the Whisper protocol
`PoW`: minimum PoW accepted by the peer
`bloom`: bloom filter of Whisper topic accepted by the peer
`isLightNode`: when true, the peer won't forward messages
`confirmationsEnabled`: when true, the peer will send message confirmations
`rateLimits`: is `[ RateLimitIP, RateLimitPeerID, RateLimitTopic ]` where each values is an integer with a number of accepted packets per second per IP, Peer ID, and Topic respectively

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

`bloom, isLightNode, confirmationsEnabled, and rateLimits` are all optional arguments in the handshake. However, if you specify optional field you MUST also specify all optional fields preceding it, in order to be unambiguous.
```

Reviewer: This was my initial suggestion and it is stricter but also maintains compatibility with EIP 627. @kdeme @adambabik do you see any issues with this? Or would you definitely prefer an even stricter version, where all fields are always required (thus breaking compatibility with EIP-627)?

Reviewer: (Right now it is ambiguous because current EIP627 makes bloom filter optional, and this spec diff also mentions "optional rate limiting". Also typo in including 'and' in above suggestion quoted form)

Author: I don't see any issues. I don't think there are any clients that specify some optional field without others.

## Rate limiting

In order to provide an optional very basic Denial-of-Service attack protection, each node SHOULD define its own rate limits. The rate limits SHOULD be applied on IPs, peer IDs, and envelope topics.

Each node MAY decide to whitelist, i.e. do not rate limit, selected IPs or peer IDs.

If a peer exceeds node's rate limits, the connection between them MAY be dropped.

Each node SHOULD broadcast its rate limits to its peers using rate limits packet code (`0x14`). The rate limits is RLP-encoded information:

```
[ IP limits, PeerID limits, Topic limits ]
```

`IP limits`: 4-byte wide unsigned integer
`PeerID limits`: 4-byte wide unsigned integer
`Topic limits`: 4-byte wide unsigned integer

> The rate limits MAY be also sent as an optional parameter in the handshake.

Reviewer: Does it have to be? Vs just its own Status code, and communicating right after handshake

Author: The best would be to do it in the handshake, otherwise, a node needs to restrain any activity before the rate limits are broadcasted and peers handle it which is unknown when it exactly happens.
